In this section, we'll learn the basics of encryption.
By the end of this section,
you will understand what encryption is,
differentiate different types of encryption techniques,
and determine the appropriate encryption type for a given scenario.
Where does encryption fit in our three component model of security?
It fits in prevention.
So what is encryption?
In cryptography, encryption is the process of taking data that is plaintext,
meaning anyone can read it,
and converting it via a mathematical algorithm into ciphertext.
Only authorized parties with
the appropriate key can reverse the process and view the data.
What is the earliest encryption you can think of?
While not considered to be true encryption,
there is evidence of modified hieroglyphic characters to enhance the words and
phrases used in tombs of noblemen in Egypt as early as almost 4,000 years ago.
In ancient Greece and Sparta, a scytale,
which is a length of parchment wrapped around a specifically size cylinder was used.
Once the parchment was wrapped,
a message was written on it.
Each commander had the same size cylinder.
If the parchment were wrapped on an incorrectly size cylinder,
the message was unreadable.
While this could be easily compromised,
the information on it was generally time-sensitive battle messages,
thus proving very effective.
Lastly, and perhaps most famously,
nearly 2,000 years ago,
Roman Emperor Julius Caesar used what's known as the Caesar cipher.
The variant used by Caesar was a shift by three cipher,
each character was shifted by three places.
So the character A was replaced by D,
B was replaced by E, and so on.
The characters would wrap around at the end,
so X would be replaced by A.
We'll take a look at the Caesar cipher in action in a bit.